#Week 1

## Maps: one dimensional discrete dynamical dystems

Our entry point for the vast field of dynamical systems is given by the 1D discrete dynamical systems. We began analysizing **iterated maps**, focusing on the analysis of **orbits, **i.e., sequences of states emerging from the repeated application of a **mapping function**, that takes a given **state** into the future. We gauged the behaviors of orbits **qualitatively**, through geometrical analysis of orbits.

A map (on the real numbers, for example) takes a state to the next state:

$F: x → x$

And the **orbit is the sequence of states from the repeated application of the map**.

We analyzed the long term behavior of orbits generated by the iterated application of maps with the help of the **cobweb** plot, which helps us visualize the orbits from a variety of **initial states**. Note that the orbit in the cobweb plot is the discrete sequence of states from the iterated application of the map and **not** the segments connecting them.

**Fixed points** are points in **state space **(in the current case, 1D. In the logistic map, it is a bounded space), where the application of the mapping function leads to the exact same state, or in other words, states in **equilibrium**.

f(x*) = x*; where x* is the fixed point. 

Orbits starting in the fixed point remain in the fixed point. **Graphically**, fixed points of one dimensional maps are the points where the** identity line intersects the mapping function**. F(x) = x;

**Fixed points** come in different sorts, and can be categorized as a function of their **stability**. If orbits starting close to the fixed point return to the fixed point, the fixed point is **stable, **and in this case we find an attractor. In the converse case, where orbits starting close move further away from the fixed point, the fixed point is **unstable**, we have a **repellor**.

Clearly, **a 1D map can have any number of fixed points**, depending on the number of times the mapping function intersects the identity line.

**To determine the category of fixed points** (attracting or repelling) we calculate the **derivative of the map **at the fixed point. If the modulus of the derivative is larger than one, the fixed point is repelling, and attracting in the reverse case.

An attractor will draw closeby orbits asymptotically to itself. **The part of the orbit before the attractor is reached is called the transient**. As the attractor is never truly reached, **the duration of the transient is somewhat subjective**.

As the fixed point stability is a function of the local derivative, the **category of the fixed points can change** as the mapping function changes. This we call a **qualitative change** in the behavior of orbits. Consider for instance the following map:

$ f(x) = a. x $

Where a is a **parameter**. Clearly, when $a<1$ the fixed point at the origin is attracting, and in the converse case, $a > 1$, repelling.

In this map, we can see that when a = -1, something interesting happens, we obtain a flip-flop behavior. That is, we obtain a **periodic orbit **of period 2. That happens because applying the mapping function twice, takes any state into the same state:

$f(f(x)) = x, \forall x.$

In this lecture, we have considered **smooth changes** of the mapping function. In particular, we considered the different orbits of the **logistic map**.

$ f(x) = ax(1-x) $

For varying parameter a.  **Each value of the parameter specifies a dynamical system**. 

To examine the long term behavior of orbits for different dynamical systems, we explored the **parameter space **of the logistic map.

Experimenting with the value of a, we discovered a multitude of possible orbits. Values smaller than 2 lead to an attracting fixed point at the origin, values less than 3 led to periodic orbits of period 2, some other values led to other periods.

## The Logistic Map and its Equilibria

This week and the next we will be discussing one of the simplest models of dynamical systems, which notwithstanding its simplicity, displays considerably complex behavior, the logistic map. It represents the evolution of a population that undergoes exponential growth (ax) and is bounded by a maximum population of 1 (1-x). This results in a parabola.

$ f(x) = a.x (1-x)$

The intersection of this function with the identity function $f(x) =x$ leads to the emergence of **fixed-points** (represented $x^*$). When orbits have initial states at fixed-points the orbit always maps to itself, remaining motionless. That is $f(x^*)=x^*$.

However, the orbits starting with initial conditions close to equilibria (i.e., $x^*+\epsilon$) may display different behavior: some equilibria attract nearby orbits, some repell. These fixed-point equilibria are aptly denominated **attractors** and **repellors**. Can you figure out a condition that is able to distinguish between these different kinds of fixed-points?

We wrote a script that iteratively applies a function (the logistic function) to an **initial condition** ($x_0$), for a certain number of iterations (it). The shape of the parabola is controlled by parameter 'a'.

We noted that for some values of $a$ (particularly those after 3, for example) we observed that orbits did not settle in fixed-points, rather assuming more interesting behavior, with time-series seemingly oscillating with multiple fixed points. The question has popped up: can we find conditions for the point where the **qualitiative behavior** of the function changes?



## Questions to mull over:

- What makes an equilibrium stable or unstable? In other words, what is the mathematical condition for stability of fixed-points? Can you prove it?
- In the logistic map, what is the formula that returns the position of the equilibria as a function of the parameter $a$? Can you find the equilibria for 'any functions'?
- In the logistic map, at what value of a we see a change of behavior, from a fixed-point attractor to a periodic attractor? 

### Some Crucial Theorems

Stability of Fixed Points (Ref [1] Theorem 1.5, pg. 10)

Banach Fixed-Point Theorem: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banach_fixed-point_theorem

(what's the difference with the Brower's fixed poind theorems)

- we will see more about this in the coming lectures.

## References and Further Reading for This Week

[1] Chaos - Aligood and Yorke ( Chap. 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 - next lesson 1.4, 1.5)

[2] Dynamics and Bifurcations - Hale and Koçak (Chap. 3.1 and 3.2)

[3] Non-linear oscillations - Holmes and Guckenheimer

[4] Non-linear Dynamics and Chaos - Strogatz (10.1 and 10.2, next lesson 10.3)